.. _text-and-image-rendering:

Text and Image Rendering
========================

Panda includes support for easily rendering dynamic text onscreen or in the
3-d world. It supports full use of the Unicode character set, so it can easily
render international languages (including Asian languages, when used with an
appropriate font).

There are three interfaces for creating text, depending on your requirements:
the :ref:`TextNode <text-node>`, which is the fundamental text-rendering class
and serves as the implementation for the other two, :ref:`onscreentext`, a
simple high-level wrapper around TextNode, :ref:`onscreenimage`, the same as
:ref:`onscreentext` but now for images, and :ref:`directlabel`, which
integrates with the rest of the :ref:`directgui` system.

International character sets
----------------------------


By default, Panda assumes the text strings you give it are formatted in the
iso8859 character set, also called latin-1 on Linux. This is a standard
character set that uses one byte per character and supports most Western
European languages, and is likely to be the character set you're using anyway.
If you have need for more characters than are supported by iso8859, you must
use a more advanced encoding system like utf-8 (which may use one, two, or
three bytes per character). To use utf-8, put the following in your Config.prc
file:

::
    
    text-encoding utf8



And then make sure the strings you pass as text strings are encoded using the
"utf-8" encoding method, for instance by saving your Python source files in
"utf-8" (this can actually be tricky to do properly in Windows; we recommend
you use a non-Microsoft editor such as Emacs or Eclipse to do this).


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   text-fonts
   text-node
   onscreentext
   onscreenimage
   embedded-text-properties
